---
layout: story
name: wla
title: World Lottery Association
story-title: "The heart of the global lottery industry"
---
_[This story first appeared on eNCA.com on Tuesday 15 August 2017](http://www.enca.com/world/the-global-lottery-industrys-little-known-nerve-centre)_.

If the global lottery industry is a living organism, a strong argument can be made that its nerve center is Basel, Switzerland.

There, on Lange Gasse 20, stands the headquarters of the [World Lottery Association](https://www.world-lotteries.org/about-us/our-offices) (WLA). Since its inception in 1999, the self-described lobbying group has sought to [fulfill its mission](https://www.world-lotteries.org/about-us/about-the-wla)
 of supporting state lotteries’ growth around the world and upholding 
standards of ethical conduct, charitable giving and responsible 
gambling.

Heavily backed by eight major lottery companies, the WLA appears to 
be succeeding in at least its growth objective.  Worldwide lottery 
revenue surged from [$160-billion in 2003](http://www.lotteryinsider.com/vol67/no3.htm), shortly after the organisation began, to [$293-billion in 2014](https://www.world-lotteries.org/images/publications/compendia/wla-compendium-2015.pdf).
 Association members accounted for 93 percent of that revenue, according
 to the Global Lottery Data Compendium 2015. The organisation said in a 
statement that it has certified 55, or more than one third, of its 
member lotteries at the highest level of its responsible gambling 
program.  It asserts on its website that all members contribute the 
majority of net revenues to good causes.

But an upcoming national survey of American state lotteries by [PennLive](http://www.pennlive.com/) and students from the [Columbia Journalism School](https://journalism.columbia.edu/) raises questions about the association’s gambling certification program. A [document ](http://www.illinoislottery.com/content/dam/ill/documents/LCB%20Meeting%20Minutes%2010-10-12%20%282%29.pdf)from the [Illinois Lottery](http://illinoislottery.com/),
 a WLA member, appears to contradict the organisation’s assertion about 
the percentage of charitable cause donations. And the association’s 
location in Switzerland, a country with few disclosure requirements for 
non-profit associations, seems to go against the organisation’s stated 
commitment to transparency for its members.

**Backed by Behemoths, South African Ties**

Created from the merger of two international lottery associations, 
the WLA is heavily funded by eight lottery giants that contribute at 
either platinum or gold levels. In 2012, a platinum sponsorship was 
175,000 CHF (Swiss francs), or R1.6-million, according to documents 
obtained from the Basel commercial register.

The WLA declined to answer what proportion of their budget comes from
 these contributions, but it seems unlikely that the sum makes a large 
dent in the donors’ pockets.

In 2015, these corporations, among the largest in the world lottery 
industry, enjoyed combined net revenues of more than $10.8 billion and 
employed more than 32,500 people full-time, according to the [WLA’s 2016 data compendium](https://world-lotteries.org/images/publications/compendia/wla-compendium-2016-rev4.pdf). Platinum sponsor IGT has [more than 12,000 employees](https://www.igt.com/en/explore-igt/about-igt/who-we-are) who work in about 100 countries. Scientific Games, another platinum donor, [has nearly 8,000 employees](http://www.scientificgames.com/media/69059/corporate_profile.pdf) distributed across six continents, according to a company report.

WLA members, which include about 150 state lotteries as well as 60 
suppliers to the lottery and sports betting industry, are also located 
on six continents. 

The South African Lottery is part of the association, which has 
longstanding ties to the country. In 2004, then-operator Uthingo 
Management held [the first worldwide lottery conference ever in Africa](https://www.world-lotteries.org/events/wla-conventions/1835-2004-convention-durban-south-africa),
 organizing the event around the theme of “Dream Africa.” At that 
gathering the group asked members for R1-million, or about $170,000, in 
donations from members to bolster Uthingo’s work with hospitals and 
schools for disadvantaged children in Africa, among other causes.  “In 
this manner, the WLA can show its support for the exceptional work that 
is being done,” meeting minutes said.

Another link to South Africa is that Yvonne Schnyder, one of the association’s two original secretaries general and a [current honorary member](https://www.world-lotteries.org/members/our-members/honorary-members), sits [on the board](http://ithubalottery.co.za/1386-2/) of current Lottery operator Ithuba.

**Biennial Summits, Growth Agenda**

The association regularly convenes regional meetings and hosts biennial conferences. Next year’s summit [will be in Buenos Aires](https://www.world-lotteries.org/media-news/wla-news/2361-the-world-lottery-summit-2018-will-be-held-in-buenos-aires); the [2016 event took place in Singapore](http://www.wls2016.org/). An article on the website for the 2014 event [cited ](http://www.wls2014.com/startseite/news/ten-good-reasons-to-rome.html)“Ten
 good reasons to join us for the World Lottery Summit 2014 in Rome.” In 
addition to Roman art, cuisine and la dolce vita, attendees were enticed
 by the promises of outstanding networking opportunities and keynote 
speeches by industry leaders. The site also spoke about educational 
sessions that would address the constant threat of illegal off-shore 
betting operators. 

Preserving states lotteries’ monopoly has been an organisational 
priority since its foundation. “The importance that the WLA presents as a
 lobby group should not be underestimated,” according to minutes from a 
2000 executive committee meeting in Carlsbad, California.  “It can play 
an important role in influencing governments to maintain the lottery 
monopoly.”

The topic arose again in a May 2004 executive committee meeting in 
Rome, Italy.  An invitation-only seminar titled, “Defending the state 
lottery monopoly” was planned for March or April 2005. “The members 
agree that this seminar is a good idea but request that the word 
“monopoly” not be used in the title,” meeting minutes said.

A statement the association sent for this article spoke about the 
“depredations of illegal gaming,” adding that this form of gambling 
exhibits little regard for the safety and security of players, 
particularly minors and other vulnerable customers.

Preserving state lotteries’ monopoly is critical for their continual expansion, another key association objective. In a [pre-conference video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HF-BV2IrZrI)
 posted on YouTube, WLA President Jean-Luc Maner-Banet said that the 
business program was “maybe the most important” reason to attend the 
2016 summit. The organisation’s growth agenda is visible on its website,
 where it posts quarterly updates and detailed analyses of lotteries’ 
performances, as well as in documents from the Basel commercial 
register.  And the association’s statement for this story said that a 
lottery product’s performance should be judged by “the net profit it 
produces.”

**Questions about Responsible Gambling, Charitable Donations, Location**

The WLA espouses its commitment to responsible gaming, and has a 
four-stage evaluation process by which members are certified for their 
adherence to those principles.

But a forthcoming national survey of more than 40 American lotteries 
conducted by PennLive and students at Columbia Journalism School found 
that the Oregon, Connecticut and Pennsylvania lotteries said they did 
not monitor frequent winners. All were WLA members.

An analysis of winners’ data and subsequent reporting by PennLive and
 the Columbia Journalism School found that some repeat winners can have 
issues with excessive gambling.   

  Two of these states, Connecticut and Pennsylvania, were among the 85 
WLA member lotteries worldwide that are certified to Level 2 or higher 
in the Responsible Gaming

**Framework, according to the association’s statement**

The WLA did not respond to requests for comment about how these 
states were accredited by the WLA at Level 2 for the Responsible Gaming 
Framework.

Meanwhile, the WLA states on its website that all of its members contribute the majority of net revenue to good causes.

But the percentage of revenue that has gone to education from the 
Illinois Lottery, a WLA member, has steadily fallen from 41 percent in 
the mid-1980s to 28 percent earlier this decade, according to minutes 
from a 2012 lottery board meeting.  In 2012, then-Lottery Director 
Michael Jones explained that the percentage of funding to education had 
decreased in order to increase the percentage prize payout.

The WLA did not respond to questions about the decrease in the 
percentage of Illinois Lottery proceeds that went to education, but said
 in a statement that member lotteries are typically mandated “to 
contribute to the public welfare by returning money to society in 
support of good causes.”

The association’s being based in Basel means that it is in a country 
with few disclosure requirements that has been one of the world’s major 
tax havens. Associations, or “Verein,” in Switzerland have wide latitude
 over what information they share. Forming an association involves 
drafting an Articles of Association, registering if commercial activity 
is involved and appointing at least one person as a representative of 
the entity.

Although the organisation must appoint a board and have its accounts 
audited, the substance of what it discloses is largely opaque outside of
 that which the organisation chooses to declare. (Only if the 
association is registered are there legal requirements such as supplying
 directors’ names and noting when there is a change in directors.)

The WLA did not respond to a question about whether the use of 
Switzerland could give a negative impression of the organisation. 
Instead, it said in its statement that its members “operate within a 
rigorous framework that respects the highest standards of integrity, 
consumer protection, and transparency.”  

   

**Questions that were submitted to the World Lottery Association**

I. In 2012, the annual Platinum level of contribution was 175,000 
CHF.  What is the current annual level of contribution for Platinum and 
Gold members, and what percentage of the WLA's budget do these eight 
companies supply?

II. You are probably aware of the studies that lotteries function as a
 regressive tax. In other words, that people in lower-income groups 
disproportionately tend to resort to lotteries, spend a higher 
percentage of their income on lotteries and that lottery outlets are 
also sometimes concentrated in the areas where they live. Do you accept 
that lotteries may in some cases function to draw income out of poor 
areas?

III. If you recognise this as a potential problem, what concrete 
steps has the WLA taken to work against the phenomenon of lotteries 
functioning as a regressive tax?

IV. On its website, the WLA describes its commitment to responsible 
gaming and has a formal process by which lotteries are evaluated.  But 
our survey of American state lotteries shows that there are four WLA 
members-Oregon, Connecticut, Nebraska and Pennsylvania-that do not track
 frequent winners, even though our reporting has shown that a number of 
frequent winners are problem gamblers.   Do you confirm that these four 
states do not track frequent winners?

V. Do you accept that frequency of winning may indicate a gambling addiction or problem?

VI. If Pennsylvania and Connecticut do not track potential problem 
gamblers, can you explain how they are accredited by the WLA at Level 2 
in the Responsible Gaming Framework?  

VII. The WLA states on its website that all members contribute the 
majority of net revenues to good causes, but the percentage of revenue 
that has gone to education from WLA Member, the Illinois Lottery, has 
steadily fallen from 41 percent in the mid-80s to about 23 percent 
earlier this decade.  In 2012 then-Lottery Director Michael Jones 
explained that the percentage of funding to education had decreased in 
order to increase the percentage prize payout. Can you explain why 
education would have been defunded by the Illinois Lottery? Relatedly, 
on what basis is the claim on the WLA’s website still made that the 
majority of revenue contributions go to good causes when this appears to
 be inaccurate?

VIII. the WLA as NPO association in Switzerland is subject to legal 
and financial secrecy laws by its discretion. Why is the organisation 
located in Switzerland and is there worry that use of a tax haven gives a
 wrong face to the organisation?

IX. Can we access disaggregated financials from 1999?

X. Does WLA by-laws require a code of conduct from members on 
transparency and anti-corruption - specifically, partner states they may
 be involved with?

<h3>WLA's statement in regards to these questions</h3>

<embed src="/img/stories/wla-statement.pdf" width="100%" height="800" type='application/pdf'>

<a target="_blank" href="/img/stories/wla-statement.pdf">Open in new tab</a>
